{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\info
{\title CWB_acetylation_text_2-25}
{\author Colin Brown}}\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12540\viewh14520\viewkind1
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Two forms of N-acetylation are recognized in 
\i E. coli
\i0 : post-translational N-terminal acetylation of the \\alpha Nitrogen, and post-translational modification of epsilon Nitrogen of lysine residues. Although cotranslational N-terminal N\uc0\u945  acetylation (NtAc) is widespread in eukaryotic proteins, the prevalence and physiological significance of this modification in prokaryotes is poorly understood. In 
\i E. coli
\i0 , only five native proteins are known to possess an NtAc modification: the ribosomal proteins S5, S18, and L12/7 [1]; elongation factor Tu (EFTu) [2]; and the chaperone SecB  [3]. In addition, a number of heterologous eukaryotic proteins are modified with an NtAc when overexpressed in 
\i E. coli
\i0   [4-7]. Surprisingly, we identified 4335 NtAc-modified peptides from 55 proteins across the 9 time points and 3 biological replicates of our glucose starvation data. Although the total number of N-terminal peptides recovered from these proteins remains constant across all 9 time points, there is a clear enrichment of NtAc-modified peptides beginning in early stationary phase (8h), continuing through late stationary phase (336h) [Fig. 1]\
\
No N-terminal peptides were recovered from known targets S5, S18, L12/7, or EFTu, so we were unable to confirm the acetylation status of these proteins.  However, among the NtAC peptides that were recovered, the Nt fragment from SecB was by far the most frequently observed, representing 15-41% of the total Nt-Acetylated peptides across the nine time points[Fig. 2]. In addition, six other proteins from our dataset were identified as Nt-acetylation targets in an enrichment-based analysis of N-terminal modifications in 
\i Pseudomonas aeruginosa
\i0  [8] [Table 1]. The 49 novel Nt-acetylated proteins we identified span a variety of functional categories, including transcription (RpsH, YfgB, YjfH, LysS, CysS); amino acid metabolism (IlvA, SerC, CysM, AvtA); DNA repair and replication (FtsK, ParE, MutS, XerD) and membrane transport (YtfT, SecF, CopA, PotH, DppF, OppD, XanP, AtpH) [see Table 2]. \
\
Three N-terminal N-alpha acetyltransferases (NATs) are known to regulate NtAc in 
\i E. coli
\i0 : RimI, which acetylates the N-terminal Ala residue of S18; RimJ, which targets the Nt Ala residue of S5  [9]; and RimL, which targets the N-terminal Ser of L12  [10]. The 
\i E. coli
\i0  genome also encodes four putative N-acetyltransferases (
\i yjaB
\i0 , 
\i yhhY
\i0 , 
\i yjhQ
\i0 , and 
\i yjgM
\i0 ) that have been suggested as candidate NATs [11]. The acetyltransferases responsible for Nt-acetylation of non-ribosomal proteins have not been identified, although RimJ  [4,11] and RimL  [7] have been shown to be responsible for NtAc of ectopically expressed eukaryotic proteins.  Little is known about the features governing target specificity of the Rim proteins; although specificity of eukaryotic NATs is largely dependent on the first AA residue following the iMet, mutation studies have shown that prokaryotic Rim protein specificity is largely unaffected by AA-1 mutations [7], but can be drastically changed by substitutions in downstream AA positions [5].  The AA-1 position in our 56 
\i E. coli
\i0  NtAc proteins are largely made up of Ser (34), Thr (10), and Ala (5) residues, and all but 3 have undergone iMet cleavage.  Although there is a slight bias for Ser, Thr, Asp, Glu, and Gln at the AA2 position, sequence alignment and motif enrichment analysis were unable to identify any downstream targeting signal (Data not shown). Alternatively, some of the observed Nt-acetylation may take place via a non-enzymatic mechanism, as has recently been shown for Lys N-epsilon acetylation in 
\i E. coli
\i0  [12,13]. Nonenzymatic Lys acetylation increases in stationary phase similarly to our observations for NtAc levels, and is associated with accumulation of the high-energy intermediate acetyl phosphate. Nonenzymatic Lys acetylation is thought to act as a sensing system for high levels of cellular acetate metabolism, and interestingly, a similar relationship between Acetyl-CoA levels and Nt-acetylation has recently been shown for eukaryotic proteins [14]. \
\
NtAc has a variety of functions in eukaryotic cells, including regulating protein stability, ER trafficking, protein complex formation, and membrane attachment [15], but there is no evidence for a similar role in prokaryotic cells. Nt acetylation of 
\i E. coli
\i0  30S ribosomal subunits S5 and S18 is thought to affect 30S ribosomal assembly by governing direct contacts with the rRNA [16], but no function for prokaryotic Nt acetylation outside of the ribosome has been proposed. Our observation of widespread NtAc in 
\i E. coli
\i0  proteins suggests that this PTM is broadly important for protein homeostasis, but further work will be necessary to determine its effects on target proteins and the mechanisms of its regulation.\
\
Legends:\
Fig. 1: N-terminal Nalpha Acetylated Peptide Occurance across Growth Timepoints.  Blue line represents total count of N-terminal peptides with any (or no) modification originating from parent proteins with at least one Nt-acetylated peptide in the dataset.  Green line represents total count of Nt-acetylated peptides from these proteins.  Both counts are the sum of three biological replicates for each timepoint. Dashed line (right axis) shows OD600 values for an example culture grown under identical glucose-starvation conditions. \
\
Fig. 2: N-terminal acetylated peptides show differing patterns of NtAc across growth timepoints. Counts for all peptides the protein's N-terminus and containing an Nt-acetylation (either a 42 or 43 Da mass shift) were summed across three biological replicates for each timepoint.  Color intensity shows log2-transformed, non-normalized NtAc peptide count for each timepoint. Proteins (rows) are sorted by mean abundance across all timepoints, with most abundant at the top.\
\
References:\
1 Nesterchuk MV, Sergiev PV, Dontsova OA (2011) Posttranslational Modifications of Ribosomal Proteins in Escherichia coli. Acta Naturae 3: 22-33.\
2 Arai K, Clark BF, Duffy L, Jones MD, Kaziro Y, et al (1980) Primary structure of elongation factor Tu from Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 77: 1326-1330.\
3 Smith VF, Schwartz BL, Randall LL, Smith RD (1996) Electrospray mass spectrometric investigation of the chaperone SecB. Protein Sci 5: 488-494.\
4 Bernal-Perez LF, Sahyouni F, Prokai L, Ryu Y (2012) RimJ-mediated context-dependent N-terminal acetylation of the recombinant Z-domain protein in Escherichia coli. Mol Biosyst 8: 1128-1130.\
5 Charbaut E, Redeker V, Rossier J, Sobel A (2002) N-terminal acetylation of ectopic recombinant proteins in Escherichia coli. FEBS Lett 529: 341-345.\
6 Wu J, Chang S, Gong X, Liu D, Ma Q (2006) Identification of N-terminal acetylation of recombinant human prothymosin alpha in Escherichia coli. Biochim Biophys Acta 1760: 1241-1247.\
7 Miao L, Fang H, Li Y, Chen H (2007) Studies of the in vitro Nalpha-acetyltransferase activities of E. coli RimL protein. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 357: 641-647.\
8 Ouidir T, Jarnier F, Cosette P, Jouenne T, Hardouin J (2014) Characterization of N-terminal protein modifications in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14. J Proteomics .\
9 Yoshikawa A, Isono S, Sheback A, Isono K (1987) Cloning and nucleotide sequencing of the genes rimI and rimJ which encode enzymes acetylating ribosomal proteins S18 and S5 of Escherichia coli K12. Mol Gen Genet 209: 481-488.\
10 Tanaka S, Matsushita Y, Yoshikawa A, Isono K (1989) Cloning and molecular characterization of the gene rimL which encodes an enzyme acetylating ribosomal protein L12 of Escherichia coli K12. Mol Gen Genet 217: 289-293.\
11 Fang H, Zhang X, Shen L, Si X, Ren Y, et al (2009) RimJ is responsible for N(alpha)-acetylation of thymosin alpha1 in Escherichia coli. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 84: 99-104.\
12 Kuhn ML, Zemaitaitis B, Hu LI, Sahu A, Sorensen D, et al (2014) Structural, kinetic and proteomic characterization of acetyl phosphate-dependent bacterial protein acetylation. PLoS One 9: e94816.\
13 Weinert BT, Iesmantavicius V, Wagner SA, Sch\'f6lz C, Gummesson B, et al (2013) Acetyl-phosphate is a critical determinant of lysine acetylation in E. coli. Mol Cell 51: 265-272.\
14 Yi CH, Pan H, Seebacher J, Jang IH, Hyberts SG, et al (2011) Metabolic regulation of protein N-alpha-acetylation by Bcl-xL promotes cell survival. Cell 146: 607-620.\
15 Starheim KK, Gevaert K, Arnesen T (2012) Protein N-terminal acetyltransferases: when the start matters. Trends Biochem Sci 37: 152-161.\
16 Clatterbuck Soper SF, Dator RP, Limbach PA, Woodson SA (2013) In vivo X-ray footprinting of pre-30S ribosomes reveals chaperone-dependent remodeling of late assembly intermediates. Mol Cell 52: 506-516.\
}